The dilemmas of a decentralized currency
In this article I will analyze some dilemmas that a decentralized currency project might encounter-- dilemmas driven by human behavior. The article will focus on examples from Decred, a decentralized, open-source digital currency, but the observations and findings of this article are relevant for other decentralized projects and cryptocurrencies as well.

Decred is an autonomous digital currency. Besides having a decentralized blockchain with on-chain voting enabled, Decred is currently developing a censorship-proof proposal system along with smart contracts to decentralize the funding process. What is truly unique about Decred is the team's efforts to build a Decentralized Autonomous Entity where the protocol interacts with the community to facilitate a formalized model of governance. Currently, if you are a Decred stakeholder participating in the governance process you already have a real voice in the direction of the project by voting on consensus changes. Additionally, if you are a developer who knows Golang or if you are an enthusiastic marketeer, you can easily join the project as a contractor. We are working towards a situation where there is no single point of failure within the project.

However one factor complicates this model: many people have become interested in decentralized cryptocurrencies solely for monetary gain. While it is logical for people investing their time, skills, money, and attention into the project to want to be rewarded for their efforts, problems can arise when people begin to wonder how they can maximize their gains even if this comes at the expense of the project as a whole. This creates a dilemma for the project on how to properly align the incentives of all participants in the project.


Idealistic stakeholders versus realistic traders
Currently there are 900+ digital currencies listed on CoinMarketCap. You can imagine each currency like a stock. The more people invest in a currency, the higher the price per coin will be. Just as in the traditional stock market, competition is a key element, and Decred is competing with the other 900 blockchain projects for investors. We can characterize the standpoint of these market participants in two fundamental ways:

On the one hand we have stakeholders who invest in the project because they believe in it, because they share the same values, or because they feel that Decred is contributing something significant to mankind. Some of them are more active than others, but in general they are keen on helping out wherever they can. Their view is that the long-term fundamentals of a project are more important than the swings of the price per coin. They focus on the intrinsic value of a project: investors come and go, but code is forever.

On the other hand there are traders, people who invest in a project because they speculate that the price per coin to rise. They make this decision based on charting (technical analysis), what they read on social media (sentiment analysis), or possibly based on whatever was shilled in one of the pump and dump groups they subscribed to. Some of them stick around for a while, but most of them are driven by profit and will leave whenever they feel that they should exit their position. Their focus is closed solely on the short-term possibility of making a profitable trade on the currency.

These incentives of these two groups can be aligned in some cases (win-win), but most of the times there is a battle between the two standpoints. You can see it as battle between idealistic values and potentials on one side, and a realistic, profit-driven business mindset focuses on the here and now on the other side. Ideals such as transparency, open-source and public collaboration can come into conflict with the profit-driven business attitude that is required to compete with other currency projects in the short term. If Decred plays an open hand in full transparency, competitors may be able to use our inside information to come up with a counter strategy. We see additional dilemmas arise in other areas: the decisions on whether to pay for exchange listings, or how we decide the amount of resources we might devote to marketing and PR expenditures verses resources spent on development. Conflicting points of view around these dilemmas have to be settled by the team members (the stewards) of the project and the community as a whole.


Even in a decentralized project such as Decred, we are faced with making decisions on an ongoing basis in which one perspective may win at one moment, and another perspective at another. How should the stewards of the project decide to pick one perspective over the other? Sometimes the competitiveness of the blockchain space requires us to reject the idealistic mindset. We are a decentralized and open-source project, but some circumstances require the Decred team to make decisions with a business hat on. A major example is the upcoming privacy update, which is being developed in private prior to release. While proceeding in this way lives up to the expectation of traders, in other cases we do not bow to the business mindset. For example, we do not pay exorbitant listing fees to exchanges and we will not squander our funds on marketing at the expense of the project itself. For the stewards of the project, striking the right balance is essential. Ultimately the community decides which perspective prevails.

Reflection
We are competing with other projects who face dilemmas similar to our own. Each currency is competing to attract people to join their project, either as active contributors or as investors who begin to use the currency. Nevertheless, my belief is that being obsessed with competition for its own sake is counterproductive. We should focus on our strengths and authenticity, rather than succumb to fear and insecurity. Capitulating to the trends of the moment may bring speculative interest in the short term, but such success will not be enduring if we stop what makes us unique, and especially if it comes at the expense of the quality of the platform itself. When we are doing something truly unique, there is no need for competition — in our niche we will have a monopoly!
